In recent years, in particular due to its role in music recommendation systems, Music Emotion Recognition (MER) has gained a lot of interest in scientific research. Corresponding studies typically leverage multimodal data incorporating a multitude of (predominantly audio) features. In contrast, the present study follows a unimodal approach using only song lyrics as input to the MER task. Specifically, the objective is to predict numerical scores based on Russell’s Circumplex Model by employing Machine Learning models and utilizing features extracted through several popular Feature Extraction methods in Natural Language Processing (NLP). In this context, the effectiveness of these feature extraction techniques is evaluated using a simple TF-IDF-based approach as a baseline. Specifically, the focus of the comparison lies on embeddings computed with deep NLP models, including static (Word2Vec, Doc2Vec, GloVe) and contextual (BERT, DistilBERT) embedding methods. For this purpose, a corpus of song lyrics along with audio metadata was employed, and different regression models were trained based on the features extracted from the different methods. 
The experimental results, which exhibit a very low variance across all approaches in the MER task, indicate that in the proposed scenario, more complex feature extraction methods do not significantly outperform simpler approaches, including the baseline TF-IDF approach. Although DistilBERT-based approaches achieved the highest prediction performance, the margins were minor, in particular when the pre-trained DistilBERT model was not fine-tuned. Fine-tuning DistilBERT led to a significantly bigger improvement in prediction performance, underscoring the importance of fine-tuning to fully harness the full potential of more advanced, contextual models such as DistilBERT.
Additionally, an elementary Data Augmentation approach was explored as a means to enhance model performance. However, contrary to expectations, the results showed a decrease in performance rather than the anticipated improvement.
